Advanced SIMD (NEON)[edit]
The Advanced SIMD extension (aka NEON or "MPE" Media Processing Engine) is a combined 64- and 128-bit SIMD instruction set that provides standardized acceleration for media and signal processing applications. NEON is included in all Cortex-A8 devices but is optional in Cortex-A9 devices.[83] NEON can execute MP3 audio decoding on CPUs running at 10 MHz and can run the GSM adaptive multi-rate (AMR) speech codec at no more than 13 MHz. It features a comprehensive instruction set, separate register files and independent execution hardware.[84] NEON supports 8-, 16-, 32- and 64-bit integer and single-precision (32-bit) floating-point data and SIMD operations for handling audio and video processing as well as graphics and gaming processing. In NEON, the SIMD supports up to 16 operations at the same time. The NEON hardware shares the same floating-point registers as used in VFP. Devices such as the ARM Cortex-A8 and Cortex-A9 support 128-bit vectors but will execute with 64 bits at a time,[80] whereas newer Cortex-A15 devices can execute 128 bits at a time.

ProjectNe10 is ARM's first open source project (from its inception). The Ne10 library is a set of common, useful functions written in both NEON and C (for compatibility). The library was created to allow developers to use NEON optimisations without learning NEON but it also serves as a set of highly optimised NEON intrinsic and assembly code examples for common DSP, arithmetic and image processing routines. The code is available on GitHub.